---
slug: it-em
share: it-em.png
resume:
  category: Career
  logo: it-em.png
  company: IT Event Management
  jobTitle: Lead Web Developer
  type: Full-Time
  arrangement: Onsite
  website: https://www.it-em.co.za
  location: Johannesburg North, South Africa
  start: 2006-09-01
  end: 2012-04-30
  os: windows
  tech:
    - Web Development
    - Object-Oriented Programming
    - VB.NET
    - SQL
    - Credit Card Gateways
    - HTML
    - CSS
    - JavaScript
  summary:
    Developed and delivered custom event registration websites for major events like Microsoft Tech-Ed and Partner Summits, implementing features such as secure payments, RFID integration, and reporting systems to ensure seamless user experiences. By collaborating closely with clients and managing multiple projects under tight deadlines, consistently exceeded expectations while providing full ownership and on-site support.
---

# Description

IT Event Management is a technology-driven event services provider offering onsite registration and RSVP websites.

- Developed custom event registration websites with a portfolio of Microsoft Tech-Ed (South Africa and Dubai) & Partner Summit and Microsoft Bootcamps.
- Collaborated directly with clients to source and understand their needs and translate them into effective technical solutions.
- Implemented key features such as secure payment gateways, event agendas, speaker rating scores, RFID integration for efficient on-site registration, and comprehensive reporting systems.
- Successfully managed multiple projects simultaneously under strict and tight deadlines I consistently exceeded client expectations.
- Contributed to the success of major events by ensuring seamless registration processes and a positive user experience.
- Provided on-site support with delegate and speaker queries and took full ownership and accountability for the projects.

## Projects

- **Microsoft Tech-Ed Middle East**: Designed and developed the event websites, providing on-site support in Dubai. Learned a valuable lesson in optimizing performance for slow connections and the importance of using UTC time.
- **Microsoft Tech-Ed South Africa**: Created and managed the event registration platforms.
- **Microsoft Partner Summit**: Developed the registration and management systems for the summit.
- **Microsoft Bootcamps**: Built and maintained registration websites for various bootcamp events such as Microsoft Tech-Days, Microsoft Dev Days etc.

### Features

- Fully customized event registration websites.
- Secure payment gateways integrated with iVeri and Masreq.
- Dynamic event agendas and speaker rating systems.
- RFID integration for efficient on-site registration.
- Comprehensive reporting systems for event management.
- On-site support during events to handle delegate and speaker queries.
- Bulk SMS and email communication systems for event updates and notifications.
- Responsive design using Bootstrap and jQuery for optimal user experience across devices.
